# README: cs465-fullstack
CS-465 Full Stack Development with MEAN

This project is a web application for Travlr, a fictional travel company. It was developed to illustrate an implementation of the MEAN (MongoDB, Express, Angular, Node) software stack. 

**Architecture**

- **Q: Compare and contrast the types of frontend development you used in your full stack project, including Express HTML, JavaScript, and the single-page application (SPA).**
- A: The initial iteration of the project used static HTML via an Express server. The web application's content was completely static and hardcoded into .HTML files. Then, we replaced the static HTML with dynamically generated HTML using JavaScript's Handlebars library. This enabled us to read our application's content from a local JSON file on the server (and later, a MongoDB database) and render it dynamically. Handlebars also enables frequently-used page elements, such as page headers and footers, to be defined in their own files and retrieved programmatically, enabling the resulting .HBS files to be shorter and more human-readable than the equivalent .HTML files. These both resulted in a traditional website user experience. User clicks a link, a page loads delivering the content requested by the link. In the final phase of development, the application was refactored as a single-page application (SPA) using Angular with TypeScript. SPAs are a more modern style of web application front-end. Rather than the user traveling from page to page, sending and receiving data to and from the server each time, instead the application logic and assets are downloaded to and run on the client machine, inside the web browser. This allows content to be displayed and updated dynamically within the browser without contacting the server each time the content needs to be updated. As a result, SPAs can deliver more robust and responsive UIs, and web applications that look and perform like native apps.
- **Q: Why did the backend use a NoSQL MongoDB database?**
- A: MongoDB is the M in MEAN, the software stack used for this project, so the use of MongoDB was prescribed by the MEAN framework. Reasons one might select a MongoDB database implementation include its speed and efficiency, its schemaless structure, and its use of the ubiquitous JSON format (technically, MongoDB uses a format called BSON, or Binary JSON) for data representation. These factors make MongoDB fast, flexible, and intuitive. And, though its structure is schemaless, MongoDB supports easy implementation of schemas (such as via the Mongoose library used in this project), and offers "the full range of SQL equivalent operators", allowing MongoDB to offer the "best of both worlds" between relational and non-relational databases (Giamas, 2019). 

**Functionality**
- **Q: How is JSON different from Javascript and how does JSON tie together the frontend and backend development pieces?**
- A: One strength of the MEAN stack is that every component (MongoDB, Express, Angular, and Node) use JavaScript. This enables the entire application to be developed in one language, from the back-end database to the front-end interface. So, whenever the application is representing data as an object, it will always be a JavaScript object. Helpfully, the JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) format provides an efficient and human-readable way to represent JavaScript objects. The JSON format is used to represent JavaScript objects in code, and can even be used as data storage (as we did in this project when first implementing Handlebars). Because MongoDB's BSON format is a superset of JSON, JSON-formatted data can be used directly to query or write to the database. And, since every component of the MEAN stack uses JavaScript, JSON is equally useable at every other point in the pipeline, becoming a shared datatype that can represent anything and be understood by any component of the application.
- **Q: Provide instances in the full stack process when you refactored code to improve functionality and efficiencies, and name the benefits that come from reusable user interface (UI) components.**
- A: The first major refactoring came with the implementation of Handlebars. This allowed me to replace the static .HTML files with dynamic .HBS files that display data dynamically. Handlebars also allowed the header and footer UI components, used in every page, to be defined as "partials" and invoked by name in other files. This reduces the size and complexity of the resulting .HBS files, and makes the application more loosely-coupled. Changes to the header or footer no longer require every view file to be updated; simply make the changes in the partial. A more subtle refactoring was the conversion, in Angular, from explicitly rendering data in card form to defining a new Angular component called "trip-card" to hold the rendering logic of the card view. This decouples the "trip-card" component from the "trip-listing" component, making each component more modular and reuseable. 

**Testing**
- **Q: Methods for request and retrieval necessitate various types of API testing of endpoints, in addition to the difficulties of testing with added layers of security. Explain your understanding of methods, endpoints, and security in a full stack application.**
- A: A web application needs to allow access to users in order to provide them with services. However, that access must be carefully controlled to prevent malicious actors from disrupting the application or accessing protected data. The solution is defining an API, a collection of access points (referred to as "endpoints") via which users can access the application. Typically, an endpoint invokes a method within the application, and may accept parameters as part of the user request. Parameterization of data accepted from API endpoints is important to prevent injection attacks. More broadly, user requests should be secured by a solution that incorporates the "two As" of security: authentication, and authorization. Authentication is the process of verifying a user is who they say they are, and authorization is the process of verifying that the user has permission to perform the requested operation. This project implements authentication via Node's Passport library, storing user credentials as a JWT (JSON Web Token) which is verified in code. Also vital is the encryption of any sensitive data. For example, user passwords are never stored as plaintext in the application. Rather, they are salted and hashed using SHA-512 with Node's Crypto package, and the resulting hash is stored on the server. This means that a user's password can be verified by the server, but it is impossible for an attacker to reverse-engineer the original password from the hash value.

**Reflection**
- **Q: How has this course helped you in reaching your professional goals? What skills have you learned, developed, or mastered in this course to help you become a more marketable candidate in your career field?**
- A: One specific skill that I feel this course helped me to develop further is, as simple as it sounds, using the CLI (command line interface) to perform more complex tasks. Prior to this course, I had worked with the Linux terminal (mostly in the Mongo shell) and had a basic knowledge of basic command line syntax and commands. But this course extended that greatly, using the CLI to install components with Node, and to generate boiler-plate code with Angular. This course was also my first experience working with JavaScript. It's an interesting language that I am sure I will see much more of in the future.  
But, without a doubt, the biggest thing this course has done for me is to give me a bird's-eye view of software development. Going through the entire MEAN stack, and building the entire application piece by piece over the course of eight weeks, has given greater context to the logical and physical structure of a web-based application. While I still have a lot more to learn, I feel like seeing and building the application in its entirety has gotten me to the point where "I know enough to know what I don't know". This, combined with exposure to powerful technologies such as Angular, means I now have all the tools I need to start prototyping my own web applications, to explore other software stacks like MERN or LAMP, and to generally improve my skills as a full stack developer.

**References**
Giamas, A. (2019). Chapter 1: MongoDB - A Database for Modern Web. In *Mastering MongoDB 4.x: Expert techniques to run high-volume and fault-tolerant database solutions using MongoDB 4.x* (pp. 11-17). Birmingham: Packt Publishing.
